---
layout: post
title: HTML5 Helicopter
---

h1(title). {{ page.title }}

div(meta). 5th August 2010

  <span style="font-family:SilkScreenBold;"> </span>
  <span style="font-family:SilkScreen;"> </span>

  <div id="helicopter"></div>

  <script src="/random/helicopter/helicopter.js"></script>
  <script src="/random/helicopter/modernizr-1.5.min.js"></script>

<script>
  
    var families = [ 'SilkScreenBold', 'SilkScreen'];

    var INIT = (function (m, HELICOPTER, families) {

      var numLoaded  = 0, 
          numFonts   = families.length,
          helicopter = document.getElementById('helicopter');

      function loaded() { 
        if (m.canvas && m.localstorage && m.audio && 
            (m.audio.ogg || m.audio.mp3)) {
          HELICOPTER.init(helicopter, '/random/helicopter/');
        } else {    
          el.innerHTML = 'Sorry, needs a decent browser<br /><small>' + 
            '(firefox 3.6+, Chrome 4+, Opera 10+ and Safari 4+)</small>';
        }    
      };

      function fontLoaded(family, desc) {
        if (++numLoaded === numFonts) {
          loaded();
        }
      };
    
      return {'fontLoaded' : fontLoaded};

    })(Modernizr, HELICOPTER, families);

    WebFontConfig = { 
      custom : { 
        families : families, 
        urls     : ['/random/helicopter/silkscreenbold.css', '/random/helicopter/silkscreen.css']
      },
      fontactive : INIT.fontLoaded
    };

</script>

  <script src="/random/helicopter/webfont.js"></script>
<br />
After having some fun writing "pacman":http://arandomurl.com/2010/07/25/html5-pacman.html in HTML5 I decided to write another classic game, this time Helicopter.

Again this a work in progress, this is still pretty rough around the edges, but its fun to play so I published it as soon as possible. Code can be found on "Github.":http://github.com/daleharvey/helicopter

h3. TODO
 * Improve the graphics
 * Add / Improve Audio
 * Tweak gameplay and details

h2. Things to consider

 * Modenizr - If you write your own checks for browser capabilities, you will get them wrong, just use "Modernizr":http://www.modernizr.com/.

 * Flash Of Unstyled Text - @font-face is still somewhat problematic, Firefox will display the font using a fallback until the font has loaded, Webkit will not show anything until the font has loaded, if you write text to canvas using @font-face on Webkit before the font has loaded, Webkit will not show anything.<br /><br />I have used Googles "WebFont Loader":http://code.google.com/apis/webfonts/docs/webfont_loader.html which has an api that provides callbacks for when a font has loaded, this isnt foolproof yet though as it can still attempt to write text before it has loaded, I have also put in a shim for each font loaded <code><span style="font-family:myfont;"></span></code> which helps.

"Comment on Hacker News":http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=1578197
